+++
date = "2017-11-06T17:11:25+08:00"
+++

# 2.7 Higher Derivatives

## DEFINITION

_The second derivative of a real function \\(f\\) is the derivative of the derivative of \\(f\\), and is denoted by \\(f^{\prime\prime}\\). The third derivative off is the derivative of the second derivative, and is denoted by \\(f^{\prime\prime\prime}\\), or \\(f^{(3)}\\). In general, the nth derivative of \\(f\\) is denoted by \\(f^{(n)}\\)._

_If \\(y\\) depends on \\(x\\), \\(y = f(x)\\), then the **second differential** of \\(y\\) is defined to be_

$$
d^2y = f^{\prime\prime}(x)\ dx^2.
$$

_In general the nth differential of \\(y\\) is defined by_

$$
d^ny = f^{(n)}(x)\ dx^n.
$$

_Here \\(dx^2\\) means \\((dx)^2\\) and \\(dx^n\\) means \\((dx)^n\\)._

We thus have the alternative notations

$$
\frac{d^2y}{dx^2} = f^{\prime\prime}(x),\ \ \frac{d^ny}{dx^n} = f^{(n)}(x)
$$

for the second and \\(n\\)th derivatives. The notation

$$
y^{\prime\prime} = f^{\prime\prime}(x),\ \ y^{(n)} = f^{(n)}(x)
$$

is also used.

The definition of the second differential can be remembered in the following way. By definition,

$$
dy=f^\prime(x)\ dx.
$$

Now hold \\(dx\\) constant and formally apply the Constant Rule for differentiation, obtaining

$$
d(dy)=f^{\prime\prime}(x)\ dx\ dx,
$$

or

$$
d^2y = f^{\prime\prime}(x)\ dx^2.
$$

(This is not a correct use of the Constant Rule because the rule applies to a real constant \\(c\\), and \\(dx\\) is not a real number. It is only a mnemonic device to remember the definition of \\(d^2y\\), not a proof.)

The third and higher differentials can be motivated in the same way. If we hold \\(dx\\) constant and formally use the Constant Rule again and again, we obtain

$$
dy = f^\prime(x)\ dx,
$$

$$
d^2y = f^{\prime\prime}(x)\ dx\ dx = f^{\prime\prime}(x)\ dx^2,
$$

$$
d^3y = f^{\prime\prime\prime}(x)\ dx^2\ dx = f^{\prime\prime\prime}\ dx^3,
$$

$$
d^4y = f^{(4)}(x)\ dx^3\ dx =f^{(4)}(x)\ dx^4,
$$

and so on.

The _acceleration_ of a moving particle is defined to be the derivative of the velocity with respect to time,

$$
a = dv/dt.
$$

Thus the velocity is the first derivative of the distance and the acceleration is the second derivative of the distance. If s is distance, we have

$$
v = \frac{ds}{dt}, \ \ a = \frac{d^2s}{dt^2}.
$$

### EXAMPLE 1

A ball thrown up with initial velocity \\(b\\) moves according to the equation

$$
y = bt- 16t^2
$$

with \\(y\\) in feet, \\(t\\) in seconds. Then the velocity is

$$
v = b - 32t\ ft/sec,
$$

and the acceleration (due to gravity) is a constant,

$$
a = -32\ ft/sec^2.
$$

### EXAMPLE 2

Find the second derivative of \\(y = \sin (2\theta)\\). 

_First derivative_ 

Put \\(u = 2\theta\\). Then

$$
y = \sin u,\ \ \frac{dy}{du} = \cos u, \ \ \frac{du}{d\theta} = 2.
$$

By the Chain Rule,

$$
\frac{dy}{d\theta} = \frac{dy}{du} \cdot \frac{du}{d\theta} = \cos (2\theta) \cdot 2,
$$

$$
\frac{dy}{d\theta} = 2\cos (2\theta).
$$

_Second derivative_ 

Let \\(v = 2\cos(2\theta)\\). We must find \\(dv/d\theta\\). Put \\(u = 2\theta\\). Then

$$
v = 2\cos u, \ \ \frac{dv}{du} = -2\sin u, \ \ \frac{du}{d\theta} = 2.
$$

Using the Chain Rule again.

$$
\frac{d^2y}{d\theta^2} = \frac{dv}{d\theta} = \frac{dv}{du} \cdot \frac{du}{d\theta} = (-2\sin(2\theta)) \cdot 2.
$$

This simplifies to

$$
\frac{d^2y}{d\theta^2} = -4\sin(2\theta).
$$

### EXAMPLE 3

A particle moves so that at time \\(t\\) it has gone a distance \\(s\\) along a straight line, its velocity is \\(v\\), and its acceleration is \\(a\\). Show that

$$
a = v\frac{dv}{ds}.
$$

By definition we have

$$
v = \frac{ds}{dt},\ \ a = \frac{dv}{dt},
$$

so by the Chain Rule,

$$
a = \frac{dv}{ds}\frac{ds}{dt} = v\frac{dv}{ds}.
$$

### EXAMPLE 4

If a polynomial of degree \\(n\\) is repeatedly differentiated, the \\(k\\)th derivative will be a polynomial of degree \\(n - k\\) for \\(k \le n\\), and the \\((n + 1)\\)st derivative will be zero. For example,

$$
y = 3x^5 - 10x^4 + x^2 - 7x + 4.
$$

$$
dy/dx = 15x^4 - 40x^3 + 2x - 7.
$$

$$
d^2y/dx^2 = 60x^3 - 120x^2 + 2.
$$

$$
d^3y/dx^3 = 180x^2 - 240x.
$$

$$
d^4y/dx^4 = 360x - 240.
$$

$$
d^5y/dx^5 = 360.
$$

$$
d^6y/dx^6 = 0.
$$

Geometrically, the second derivative \\(f^{\prime\prime}(x)\\) is the slope of the curve \\(y^\prime = f^\prime(x)\\) and is also the rate of change of the slope of the curve \\(y = f(x)\\).
